# Homework 2

A Jupyter notebook with the workings/code is located [here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/glottologist/rare-skills-circom-bootcamp/refs/heads/main/notebooks/homework2/answers.ipynb).

## Problem 1

Find the elements in a finite field that are congruent to the following values:

- -1
- -4
- -160
- 500

### Answer 1

- 70 is congruent to -1
- 67 is congruent to -4
- 53 is congruent to -160
- 3 is congruent to 500

## Problem 2

Find the elements that are congruent to a = 5/6, b = 11/12, and c = 21/12

Verify your answer by checking that a + b = c (in the finite field)

### Answer 2

$$ \frac{5}{6} + \frac{11}{12} = \frac{21}{12} \implies \frac{1}{6} \times 5 + \frac{1}{12} \times 11 = \frac{1}{12} \times 21 $$

Taking the multiplicative inverse $mod 71$ of the denominators in each fraction:

$$12 \times 5 + 6 \times 11 = 6 \times 21$$

$$(60 + 66) \mod 71 = 55$$

Or, because the denominators can be representated as a common denominator and the numerators are less than $p$.

$$ \frac{5}{6} + \frac{11}{12} = \frac{21}{12} \implies \frac{10}{12} + \frac{11}{12} = \frac{21}{12}$$

We times everything by 12.

$$ 10 + 11 = 21$$

which is true.

## Problem 3

Find the elements that are congruent to a = 2/3, b = 1/2, and c = 1/3.

Verify your answer by checking that a \* b = c (in the finite field)

### Answer 3

$$ \frac{2}{3} \times \frac{1}{2} = \frac{1}{3} \implies (\frac{1}{3} \times 2) \times (\frac{1}{2} \times 1) = \frac{1}{3} \times 1 $$

Taking the multiplicative inverse $mod 71$ of the denominators in each fraction:

$$(12 \times 5) \times (6 \times 11) = 6 \times 21$$

$$(48 \times 36) \mod 71 = 24$$

## Problem 4

The inverse of a 2 x 2 matrix $A$ is

$$
A^{-1}=\frac{1}{\text{det}}\begin{bmatrix}d & -b\\-c & a\end{bmatrix}
$$

where $A$ is

$$
A = \begin{bmatrix}a & b\\c & d\end{bmatrix}
$$

And the determinant det is

$$
\text{det}=a \times d-b\times c
$$

Compute the inverse of the following matrix in the finite field:

$$
\begin{bmatrix}1 & 1\\1 & 4\end{bmatrix}
$$

Verify your answer by checking that

$$
AA^{-1}=I
$$

Where $I$ is the identity matrix.

### Answer 4

$$ A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 && 1 \\ 1 && 4 \end{bmatrix} $$
$$ \text{det}=24 $$
$$ A^{1} = \begin{bmatrix} 25 && 47 \\ 47 && 24 \end{bmatrix} $$

## Problem 5

What is the modular square root of 12?

Verify your answer by checking that x \* x = 12 (mod 71)

Use brute force to find the answer (in Python)

### Answer 5

The brute forced values x are:

$x = 15\\x = 56$

## Problem 6

Suppose we have the following polynomials:

$$
p(x)=52x^2+24x+61\\q(x)=40x^2+40x+58
$$

What is p(x) + q(x)? What is p(x) \* q(x)?

Use the `galois` library in Python to find the roots of p(x) and q(x).

What are the roots of p(x)q(x)?

### Answer 6

The sum of the polynomials is:

$p(x) + q(x): 21x^2 + 64x + 48$

The product of the polynomials is:

$p(x) * q(x): 21x^4 + 58x^3 + 26x^2 + 69x + 59$

The roots of p(x) => [34 42]

q(x) has no root => []

The roots of p(x)q(x) => [34 42]

## Problem 7

Find a polynomial f(x) that crosses the points (10, 15), (23, 29).

Since these are two points, the polynomial will be of degree 1 and be the equation for a line (y = ax + b).

Verify your answer by checking that f(10) = 15 and f(23) = 29.

### Answer 7

The polynomial is: $12x + 37$

## Problem 8

What is Lagrange interpolation and what does it do?

Find a polynomial that crosses through the points (0, 1), (1, 2), (2, 1).

Use this Stackoverflow answer as a starting poin

### Answer 8

Lagrange interpolation is the technique of reconstructing a polynomial of rank `n-1` given a set of `n` distinct points sampled from the polynomial.

The basis of the technique is to find `n` polynomials where each one passed through one and one point only of the sampled data and is zero at all other points, this point is also given a coefficent which is the recipricol of the polynomial evaluated at the x point.

To put this more formally:

$$P(x)=\Sigma^{n}_{j=1} P_j (x)$$

where:

$$P(x)=\prod^{n}_{k=1,k \neq j} \frac{x - x_k}{x_j - x_k} $$

### Simplified Example

Let's assume that the polynomial we want to recover is:

$$
p(x)=-x^2+4x-1
$$

and the samples we have are:

| x   | y   |
| --- | --- |
| 1   | 2   |
| 3   | 2   |
| 4   | -1  |

The Polynomial will be of the dollowing form:

$$
P(x)=l_1(x)+l_2(x)+l_3(x)
$$

where $$l_n(x)$$ are the Lagrange polynomials.

If we take the first point in the sample `(1,2)`. We first set the other points to be 0 at their x point, i.e. we make them roots.

$$
l_1(x)=(x-3)(x-4)
$$

We then evaluate this for the x coordinate at the first point `(1,2)` .

$$
l_1(1)=6
$$

We then scale by `y` value of the first point as per the equation. The full Lagrange polynomial is then:

$$
l_1(x)=y_1\frac{1}{6}(x-3)(x-4)=\frac{2}{6}(x-3)(x-4)=\frac{1}{3}(x-3)(x-4)
$$

We repeat the process for the other points:

$$
l_2(x)=-(x-1)(x-4)
$$

$$
l_3(x)=-\frac{1}{3}(x-1)(x-3)
$$

The original polynomial can be reconstructed by summing the lagrange polynomials:

$$
P(x)=l_1(x)+l_2(x)+l_3(x)=\frac{1}{3}(x-3)(x-4)-(x-1)(x-4)-\frac{1}{3}(x-1)(x-3)
$$

$$
\therefore P(x)=4x-x^2+1
$$

The plynomial that crosses through the points (0, 1), (1, 2), (2, 1) is $70x^2 + 2x + 1$
